>> This is "Nuevo."
The third extraterrestrial
craft recovered
in the vicinity of the
Los Alamos Nuclear Plant
came down in Aztec,
New Mexico, with 14
dead extraterrestrial beings.
This is "Nuevo"'s investigation.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Gaia presents "Nuevo,"
with Jaime Maussán.
>> On March 25, 1948, the
third incident related to one
of the so-called flying
saucers in New Mexico occurred.
As specified in the memo that
Guy Hottel sent to the director
of the FBI, Edgar Hoover.
Although the FBI
wanted to dismiss
this document as
irrelevant, it is shown
that it is really very precise.
What is stated there is
demonstrated by real facts,
with evidence and witnesses.
Scott and Suzanne Ramsey
spent decades of their lives
investigating this case,
gathering all the evidence
to present in a book.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was evening on
Wednesday, March 25, 1948,
when patrolman Manuel Sandoval
followed a strange light
in the desert, similar to what
had been seen the previous
three nights in the small
town of Cuba, New Mexico.
The mysterious
light appeared to be
an airship or saucer that was
moving slowly over New Mexico.
Officer Sandoval was determined
to uncover the mystery.
After several hours
on a remote road
in Hart Canyon near
Aztec, New Mexico,
he encountered an
unexpected scene.
Patrolman Sandoval was
surprised that the object
could have landed so softly
on a clearing in the brush.
It was dawn, and
20 men surrounded
a strange circular
metal ship that
lay on a plateau near a gorge.
According to their
version of the story,
they didn't reach
the site as quickly
as they wanted because a brush
fire was close to where they
worked and could have threatened
the equipment that extracted
natural gas from the ground.
The workers in the
oil and gas industry
were fascinated
with what they saw.
They thought that it was a
new type of airplane belonging
to the United States Air Force.
However, it was
strangely shaped.
It didn't have wings, nor
the form of an airplane.
They surmised it was some kind
of strategic secret weapon.
After all, the military
had surprised the world
by manufacturing the first
atomic bomb and the use
of nuclear energy in the area.
The ship metallic and silver
in color but not shiny.
Inside, they observed at
least four small dead bodies
in the main cabin.
The beings did not look human.
It was then that they realized
that the reports of flying
saucers were real, and
that the stories of aliens
from another world had
crashed in San Antonio, New
Mexico, and Roswell.
Later, after the
military arrived,
everyone was questioned,
interrogated,
and even threatened.
Their cameras and
film were confiscated.
In total, there were between
14 and 16 small dead bodies.
The beings were barely
1 meter in height.
They all looked
burned and dehydrated.
And they were wearing
odd metallic clothes.
Years later, one of the
scientists involved thoroughly
studied the findings
and wrote a book.
He presented his
conclusions in a conference
and revealed specific details
of the crashes and beings.
Those involved in releasing
the information to the public
were prosecuted and
brought to trial.
History would be forgotten
for more than 40 years,
until another investigation
was carried out.
More details had been
found, facts that would
confirm the extraordinary case.
Then, another 20
years had passed,
which would be more
than 60 years total
from the original
sightings and discoveries
before a new investigation
revealed the names of all those
involved.
Direct testimonies
were obtained,
and finally the identities
of the scientists
who revealed one of the
most extraordinary incidents
in human history.
A ship of
extraterrestrial origin
was recovered intact, with
its crew inside, a story that
is finally coming to light.
Aztec, New Mexico, is
located just over 100 miles--
that's about 180
kilometers-- away
from the discovery of the craft.
It was also near the place
the first atomic bomb
was detonated and
tested in 1945.
Aztec is located very close to
the Los Alamos Nuclear Power
Plant, where the first
atomic bombs were built.
This area is called
Aztec because it
was named after Aztec
archaeological mines that
were discovered there.
>> [SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> This is a story in which
virtually all the witnesses
have died.
Curiously, all those
who witnessed the ship
and saw its occupants
would literally
become millionaires,
respected men
in their community who
knew how to keep silent.
However, one Doug Nolan decided
to talk before he passed away.
Here is a testimony
recorded in 2003.
At the time of his
experience in 1948,
Doug was just 19 years old.
>> (ON RECORDING) I looked.
>> And there was only four.
>> There was just four.
And that's what the book says.
>> And it had a
dome at the bottom.
Well, I don't know.
Never paid any-- it was buried.
It was sitting in the dirt.
This up here is where the
door come down, though.
It opened from right at the
top out and just folded down.
>> So how long were you there
before the military got there?
>> Oh, about five hours--
five or six.
It was burning.
That's why we went up there.
>> What part was burning?
>> The trees were burning.
>> Aztec's residents believed
that it was an aircraft making
an emergency landing.
Scott Ramsey's investigation
suggests the possibility
that it was the police
who informed the army
of the crash of the alien ship.
Others think that it was the
neighbors in the area that
alerted authorities.
>> (ON RECORDING) Who
actually called the military?
Or did you call the sheriff?
>> We didn't call the military.
And I don't know
who called them.
I think that
rancher called them.
>> Oh.
>> He called--
I don't know whether he
called the military or not.
But I think he called
sheriff's department,
because they come out.
The army center from Aztec
before any of those others
ever showed up.
>> Who came out from Aztec?
>> Sheriff.
>> Did he look inside it?
>> I think he did.
I think he did.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Finally, the
military arrived,
confiscated the bodies, and
took control of the site.
Witnesses claim they
were taken and locked up
as prisoners, as
Doug Nolan recalls
in this unpublished recording.
>> (ON RECORDING) There
was about three of them,
who all showed up together.
>> They were in a Jeep, or--
>> No, they come in
a staff car from,
I guess that came
in from Durango.
I don't know where
they come in from.
They come in on the road.
>> It came down from-- but
they came down from the north?
>> I don't know which way.
We just saw them coming
up from the ranch.
They just come right on in.
They don't--
>> They come up, and
you're all standing around.
What do they do?
>> Told us to get
away from that thing.
Said, you're not
allowed up here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A story that was
all but forgotten,
and thanks to the work
of researchers like Scott
and Suzanne Ramsey, have now
come forward with details never
before revealed.
After 25 years of research, they
have uncovered factual evidence
of this fascinating
discovery, all
documented in detail
of one of the greatest
stories of all time.
Only a small group of
people witnessed this event,
most of them
inhabitants of the area,
and some workers of the
oil industry and firemen.
Eventually, all of them
would be millionaires.
But nobody wanted to
talk about this case.
>> We can clearly see here
where the UFO was coming from.
>> Yes.
It came from that area down
there after it had gone to-- it
had been in Cuba that
night, Cuba, New Mexico.
It basically followed the
terrain of Highway 44,
which is valleys and canyons.
It came up through Largo
Canyon, the Largo Basin.
It came across what
is now basically
Highway 173, or State Route 173,
went over the Archuleta Ranch.
It appeared to be in
trouble at that point.
To quote Valentine Archuleta,
"it fluttered like a leaf."
It bounced off the
canyon wall of the mesa
and went on a
trajectory of northeast.
If you take a straight
line from here
to Valentine
Archuleta's ranch, that
would bring you to
right about here.
And then as the witnesses tell
us, it ended up over there.
>> This is the place?
>> The epicenter's
about right here.
The witnesses I talked to
said that it was at an angle,
and that all the
silt was pushed up,
kind of like you'd imagine
if you took your hand
and ran it through sand.
And it wasn't covered at all.
But right around the one
rim, it was pretty packed
underneath it.
But, yeah, this
is where it laid.
Not much grows here anymore.
>> How tall it was?
>> 18 feet.
>> And how wide?
>> Oh, 314 feet, using
pi to 99 or 100 feet.
>> But was it all oval object?
It was circular object?
>> Lentinure--
lenticular, round, right.
It had a dome on top and a
smaller dome on the bottom.
>> What was the color?
>> A pewter-colored, kind of
a brushed aluminum pewter.
No seams, no rivets, no
joints that were visible.
>> What is your
conclusion on that sense?
>> Oh, my conclusion?
That the event is real.
It did happen March 25, 1948.
[TONES]
>> The grass never
grew again there.
The same thing happened in
San Antonio, New Mexico.
It is possible that the
energy of these objects
can sterilize the ground
where they come to rest.
It was really exciting to
arrive at the same place
where we now know that a
UFO came down, specifically
an extraterrestrial craft
with at least 14 occupants,
possibly all of them
dead for unknown reasons.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
>> To know that this
place a secret operation
an investigation was carried
out by the United States Army is
captivating.
We understand today
that the vast majority
of people who not only live here
in Aztec but around the world
have continued to
ignore this event.
>> The object was separated
in three different sections.
>> That's correct.
Well, three separate
sections of the actual disc.
And the cabin section
is reported came out
as another individual piece.
>> There were four of them?
>> At least four pieces.
The outer rim of the craft
came in three pieces.
>> And they took it from here.
>> Mm-hm, straight up to the
hill to where the concrete slab
is.
Reportedly, then put and
cradled on the flatbed trucks
that we talked about,
the M24 and M25--
Dragon Wagon was the nickname--
and then taken out through
Largo Canyon, down to Lybrook.
And once they got
to Lybrook, they
had open road to wherever
they were going to go.
You could have taken this road
back then in through Aztec.
It wasn't a good road.
And then you would have--
whatever you had
on the big trucks
you would have exposed
to the population.
This way, there's, to this
day, if we go down that way,
there is very little population.
Just north, or-- yeah,
northwest of Lybrook,
there's a small community.
But you're not going
to advertise you have
this on the back of your truck.
>> How did you find this place?
>> Years of research.
I've got to give
Bill Steinman credit.
He found it.
He was relatively certain
this was the location.
Some old-timers had told
us they kept using the word
Largo Canyon.
Well, we're kind of at
the entrance to what
you could call Largo Canyon.
Then talking, as we got
into it more and more
with the witnesses, this
was designated the place.
This is consistently
referred to as the landing
site, the recovery site--
whatever you want to call it.
>> Is this a popular site now?
Many people come here?
>> Yeah.
It draws its own
group of visitors.
They have the Alien Bike Run,
which as you can see the bike
tracks right through here.
The area is owned by
Bureau of Land Management,
as you know from
getting your permit.
It's pretty well protected.
We have some rare
cactus that grow here
throughout the whole mesa.
You're not allowed on here
with any motorized vehicles,
no four-wheelers,
motorcycles, dirt bikes.
Mountain bikes only or your
feet, no horseback riding.
They're trying to preserve all
the beauty of all this Bureau
of Land Management land.
And I think there's a
good percentage of people
that want to keep this area kind
of clean and kind of sanitized.
This was updated in 2007.
The plaque was first
put here in 2000.
It was put here kind
of near the event date.
It was put here to recognize
when people come out
to the crash site that
they are at the right spot.
And we tell a brief story
on it about what happened,
to the best of our knowledge.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In this particular case,
unlike the cases of San Antonio
and Roswell, the ship did not
crash but descended to land
on a plateau in the desert.
Another mysterious fact is
that the 14 to 16 alien beings
inside the ship were
already deceased when found.
Apparently, something caused
them to die before or as
they were descending to Earth.
Is it possible that the
microwave radars used by the US
Army inadvertently brought
their craft to the ground
and caused the
death of the beings?
Later, that type
of powerful radar
was discontinued because
it caused serious injuries
to their operators and
was suspected to interfere
with airplanes' instruments.
Even today, we acknowledge that
strong microwaves and radiation
can affect human health
in a harmful way.
We know that the radars
operating in 1945
used up to 1 megawatt
of power, which
made it a lethal
weapon for flying
ships and their occupants.
Over the years, it
has been demonstrated
that radars and microwaves
are dangerous and should
be handled with care.
The case of Aztec seems
to be a clear indication
that microwaves literally cooked
the beings inside their ship.
Scott Ramsey was able
to locate information
on the radars that
were used back then,
evidence that included
documentation in the FBI
memorandum we have revealed
that supports the reality
that microwaves were, indeed,
responsible for bringing down
the objects that
fell from the sky
in New Mexico between
1945 and 1950.
Evidence demonstrates
the likelihood
that strong radars interfered
with the navigation
system of the
extraterrestrial spacecraft.
The first of these bases
was known as El Vado
and operated until 1950.
>> El Vado Dam, or the entire
El Vado Lake was built prior
to Los Alamos being completed.
Los Alamos is right over the
mountain range over there.
They needed electricity
at Los Alamos
to do all the things
they were doing--
fusion, fission, splitting
atoms, refining the plutonium.
So what they did was they--
you can see how this is
hand-carved, this whole like.
This is a man-made lake.
And there's a GE
hydroelectric generator
just below that building
that makes the power.
And then the power was
transmitted down these lines
to Los Alamos.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The second microwave radar
base was known as Tierra
Amarilla, a military base that
operated between 1950 and 1957.
The development
of new technology
eventually made it obsolete.
And the base was abandoned,
not to be used since 1957.
>> How many people were here?
>> About 100.
They worked three shifts.
I think it grew to about 200 by
the mid '50s and through 1957,
when they were announcing that
they were closing it and going
with the DEW Line radar system.
>> Why did they stop these
radars right after the war?
>> These were here
for one main purpose,
and that was to protect Los
Alamos, Sandia National Labs,
and Kirtland Air Force Base.
And if you look at where they
are on a map, which we'll
do later, El Vado was north.
It was far north.
Moriarty was east, and
Continental Divide was west.
>> They were afraid of what?
>> Well, we were
at the beginning.
We were well-- actually,
well into the Cold War.
So we were protecting
these bases
against espionage, spy planes,
or bomber raids by the Soviets.
We came looking for radar bases
that had been talked about,
and people made
reference to him.
And we found this place
back in January 8th of 1999,
by accident.
We were out for
a week or 10 days
looking for the, quote,
unquote, "secret radar bases."
And we found this one
quite by accident.
We had checked all these
high points around this area.
>> How powerful was these radar?
>> Well, it was powerful enough
that even though this was
a restricted airspace
for private aircraft,
or commercial for that matter,
there were manuals written
on how to quickly shut the
radar down if a private aircraft
wandered into this airspace.
>> But this is an
amazing discovery.
And you proved what
nobody else could.
And we are very thankful because
this is just the second time
that a camera has--
>> Has ever been here, yeah.
That's true.
[TONES]
>> All the evidence suggests
that the possibility is that,
as pointed out in
Guy Hottel memo,
three ships crashed and not just
one in the vicinity of the Los
Alamos Nuclear Power Plant.
In fact, there were
four, but one of them
disintegrated in Roswell.
However, three were
recovered, two of them
practically intact or at least
in one piece, as witnesses
pointed out.
On the next edition of "Nuevo,"
the investigation of Aztec,
the radar bases, and the strange
invasion of flying objects
in Farmington, New Mexico.
I am Jaime Maussán, and I will
see you in the next edition
of "Nuevo."
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Gaia presented.
"Nuevo," with Jaime Maussán.